# DeLanda, Assemblage Theory

## Meta

**Reference**: Manuel DeLanda, A New Theory of Society. [Goodreads](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/24201335-a-new-philosophy-of-society).
**Read**: Fall 2016
**Why:** referenced from [TYNLH](https://jessykate.gitbooks.io/meandereading/content/a-thousand-years-of-nonlinear-history.html)

## overview
assemblage theory is an ontology or theory about the basic primitive ingredients of social systems
he suggests that more primitive than any structure we might already be familiar with
is an idea called assemblages
assemblages are more like meta-structures or patterns or processes that reflect the WAY that component parts come together
mechanisms that are followed
so rather than asking eg. whether individuals or organizations are primitive,
which is to say, where the fundamental dynamics arise from,
he proposes that the truly fundamental dynamics come from these mechanisms
and they these mechanisms underpin what we observe, and may foreshadow what we don’t.

---- 
* territorialization - processes which "increase the internal homogeneity of an assemblage"
* articulations
* coding
* assemblage
* synthetic processes?

social realism/realist (in the delanda sense) vs. social constructivism (idealist)
    assemblage theory —> synthesis of properties of a whole (not reducable to its parts) —> history in hegelian dialectics

* new materialism
* realism
* post-structuralism
* articulation (NLH, D&G, NPoS) "state of being jointed"
* micro and macro level social phenomena
* ontological clarification
* relations of interiority versus exteriority

## characterizing the assemblage approach:

- assemblages have exteriority of relations, not interiority.
    - the component parts are legit entities in their own right, may combine with different components in different ways, function of “contingently obligatory”   not "logically necessary” processes.
    - hence the critical role of historical analysis.
    - assemblages have variables **roles**: from **material** (causal (linear or non-linear)) <—> **expressive** (catalytic) (<— the analytic side of the approach)
- assemblages have variable **expressive processes** ( <— the synthetic aspects):
    - **territorializing** < — > deterritorializing. (heterogeneity vs. homogeneity)
        - “Any process which either destabilizes spatial boundaries or increases internal heterogeneity is considered deterritorializing.” (p.13)
        - components can act as mixtures, ie, can play these roles or processes in different ratios, they need not be binary.
    - another synthetic process is that of **coding** according to: "specialized expressive entities such as genes and words.” (p. 14). of course certain processes may also be decoding.
    - "territorialization provides a **first articulation** of the components,” while "the coding performed by genes or words supplies a **second articulation**, consolidating the effects of the first and further stabilizing the identity of assemblages. (p. 15)
    - process of **assembly**: all of these processes are **recurrent**, "and their variable repetition synthesizes entire populations of assemblages." (p. 19)
        - "This implies that assemblages always exist in **populations**, however small, the populations generated by the repeated occurrence of the same processes.” (p. 16)
- what is **Mechanism**: "While material components include the entire repertoire of **causal** interactions, expressive ones typically involve **catalysis**.” (p. 22)

## introduction

- the book "concerns itself with the question of what kinds of entities we can legitimately commit ourselves to assert exist.” p. 1
    - but does he really address this?
- proposes a "realist approach"
    - opposed to idealists/social constructivists
- "the realist **social ontology** to be defended in this book is all about **objective processes of assembly**: a wide range of social entities, from persons to nation-states, will be treated as assemblages constructed through very specific historical processes,” p. 3    
- cuts across nature culture divide (p. 3)
- DeLanda's book is a reconstructed theory of assemblages (from Deleuze).
- Deleuze’s theory of assemblages "was meant to apply to a wide variety of wholes constructed from heterogeneous parts. Entities ranging from atoms and molecules to biological organisms, species and ecosystems may be usefully treated as assemblages and therefore as entities that are **products of historical processes**.” p. 3    
    - but why assemblages as the primitive, the unit vector of this ontology?
- Theory must account for **synthesis** of the properties of a whole not reducible to its parts. (p. 4) (notes that hegelian dialectics address this function and is much older, but i guess does not address the other components of the theory)
    - "The main difference [from hegelian dialectics] is that in assemblage theory the fact that a whole possess synthetic or emergent properties does not preclude the possibility of analysis. In other words, **unlike organic totalities, the parts of an assemblage do not form a seamless whole**.” (p.3)
    - assemblage theory does away with the need for **essentialism** by using historical processes to explain the synthesis of organic, inorganic and social processes.

- uses assemblage theory to explore link between micro and macro levels of society
- alternative to reductionist approach
- interested in the ontological status of the entities that are actors in his “earlier work” (a previous book - which i take social processes in genral)
- we have an "intellectual habit” (p. 8) of privileging certain scales (micro macro or in between)

## Chapter 1 Assemblages against Totalities

- (“totalities” == Hegelan totalities)
- organismic metaphor is an obstacle to social ontology (ie that society ~= human body)
- need to reject the idea of **relations of interiority** (p. 9)
    - parts make a seamless whole, they are subsumed by, not legitimate independent entities. which is not what we want.
    - strict reciprocal relation between whole and parts
    - mutually consituted duality.    
- but "a whole may be both analysable into separate parts and at the same time have irreducible properties,” (p.10)
- Today, the main theoretical alternative to organic totalities is what the philosopher Gilles Deleuze calls **assemblages, wholes characterized by relations of exteriority.**” (p. 10)
- "in an assemblage... relations may be only contingently obligatory.” (p.11) (emphasis mine)
    - "While logically necessary relations may be investigated by thought alone, contingently obligatory ones involve a consideration of empirical questions, such as the coevolutionary history of two species.”
    - ==> hence the emphasis on historical process
    - breaks here from Deleuze in considering **heterogeity** one of the variables of assemblages
- "One dimension or axis defines the variable roles which an assemblage’s components may play, from a purely material role at one extreme of the axis, to a purely expressive role at the other extreme.” (p. 12)
    - "These roles are variable and may occur in mixtures, that is, a given component may play a mixture of material and expressive roles by exercising different sets of capacities.”
- "The other dimension defines variable processes in which these components become involved and that either stabilize the identity of an assemblage, by increasing its degree of internal homogeneity or the degree of sharpness of its boundaries, or destabilize it. The former are referred to as processes of territorialization and the latter as processes of deterritorialization.” (p. 12)
- synthetic processes - territorialization, words and genes. "the historical appearance of … specialized entities [words and genes] allowed a great complexification of the kinds of wholes that could be assembled in this planet.”
- "These two specialized lines of expression must be considered assemblages in their own right.” (p. 14)
- explores ideas of materialisty and territorialization
- explores ideas about "what is **mechanism**?”
    - causal    
        - but not necessarily linear. need to expand notion of causality to include non linear mechanisms
    - reasons
    - motives
- "The combination of recurrence of the same assembly processes at any one spatial scale, and the recurrence of the same kind of assembly processes (territorialization and coding) at successive scales, gives assemblage theory a unique way of approaching the problem of linking the micro- and macro-levels of social reality. The bulk of this book will be spent giving concrete examples of how we can bridge the level of individual persons and that of the largest social entities (such as territorial states) through an embedding of assemblages in a succession of micro-and macro-scales.” (p. 17).


other:

- describes as his book "Intensive Science and Virtual Philosophy” as having "reconstructed the whole of Deleuzian ontology, including those parts that bear directly on assemblage theory, in a clear, analytic style that makes a preoccupation with what Deleuze ‘really meant’ almost completely unnecessary. (p.3-4)    